sudo su - = change root user
mkdir folder -- create a folder
vim file1 -- creates a text file
cd -- comes out of all folders to root user
cd ..  -- comes out of a single folder
cd ../.. -- comes out of two folders
pwd -- prints present working directory
whoami -- prints where you are in which folder
ls -- lists the files
mv -- renames the file or folders
mv -- moves file or directories
rm -- removes the files
rm -rf -- removes the folders 
cp -- copies files and folders
cat -- prints the content of files
head -- displays first few lines
tails -- displays the last few lines
find -- searches folders and files
chmod -- change mode to change file and folder permission
chown -- chage ownership gives ownership permission
touch file -- creates a empty file
tar -- to create or extract archieve files
zip -- to compress files
unzip -- to extract compressed file
ps -- displays running process
kill -- terminates process
grep -- used search for specific patterns in files
top --monitor system process in real time


useradd username -- create a user
groupadd groupname --create a group


File and Directory Management:
ls – List files in a directory.
Example: ls -l (long listing format) or ls -a (including hidden files)
cd – Change directory.
Example: cd /path/to/directory
pwd – Print working directory.
mkdir – Make a new directory.
Example: mkdir new_folder
rmdir – Remove an empty directory.
rm – Remove files or directories.
Example: rm -rf directory_name (force remove directory and contents)
touch – Create an empty file.
cp – Copy files or directories.
Example: cp file1 file2
mv – Move or rename files and directories.
Example: mv old_name new_name
find – Search for files in a directory hierarchy.
Example: find /path/to/search -name "*.txt"
File Content and Text Processing:
cat – Concatenate and display file contents.
Example: cat file.txt
more / less – View file contents page by page.
head – Display the first few lines of a file.
Example: head -n 10 file.txt
tail – Display the last few lines of a file.
Example: tail -n 10 file.txt
grep – Search for patterns in a file.
Example: grep "pattern" file.txt
wc – Word, line, and character count in a file.
Example: wc -l file.txt (count lines)
sort – Sort lines in a file.
Example: sort file.txt
uniq – Remove duplicate lines.
Example: uniq file.txt
Process Management:
ps – Display currently running processes.
Example: ps aux (detailed list of all processes)
top – Display real-time process monitoring.
kill – Terminate processes.
Example: kill -9 PID
killall – Kill all processes by name.
Example: killall process_name
bg – Resume a job in the background.
fg – Bring a job to the foreground.
System Information:
uname – Display system information.
Example: uname -a (all system info)
df – Display disk space usage.
Example: df -h (human-readable format)
du – Display disk usage of files and directories.
Example: du -sh * (summarize disk usage)
free – Display memory usage.
Example: free -h (human-readable format)
uptime – Show how long the system has been running.
whoami – Display the current logged-in user.
hostname – Display or set the system hostname.
Permissions and Ownership:
chmod – Change file permissions.
Example: chmod 755 file.sh
chown – Change file owner and group.
Example: chown user:group file.txt
chgrp – Change group ownership.
Example: chgrp group file.txt
Networking:
ifconfig – Display or configure network interfaces.
ping – Test network connectivity.
Example: ping google.com
netstat – Display network connections, routing tables, and interface statistics.
scp – Securely copy files between hosts.
Example: scp file user@host:/path/to/destination
ssh – Securely connect to remote hosts.
Example: ssh user@hostname
wget – Download files from the web.
Example: wget http://example.com/file
Archiving and Compression:
tar – Archive files.
Example: tar -czvf archive.tar.gz /path/to/folder (compress and archive)
zip / unzip – Compress and extract zip files.
gzip / gunzip – Compress and decompress files.
Package Management (Ubuntu/Debian-based):
apt-get – Install and manage packages.
Example: sudo apt-get install package_name
dpkg – Install, remove, and manage .deb packages.
Example: dpkg -i package.deb
Disk and File System Management:
mount – Mount a file system.
umount – Unmount a file system.
fsck – Check and repair file system.
parted – Manage disk partitions.
Miscellaneous:
alias – Create custom commands.
Example: alias ll="ls -l"
history – Show command history.
man – Display the manual for a command.
















